[ECE] Clarify the swap consideration - 2nd take (#7504)
elastic/docs-content: deploy-manage/deploy/cloud-enterprise/ece-software-prereq.md

```

## Swap [ece-swap-considerations]

Swap requirements depend on the ECE roles assigned to the host:
* **Director hosts:** Do not enable swap. Directors run ZooKeeper, and swap can severely degrade ZooKeeper performance. For background, refer to the [ZooKeeper administrator guide](https://zookeeper.apache.org/doc/current/zookeeperAdmin.html).
* **All other hosts, including allocators:** Enable swap. If the host runs out of memory, the Linux OOM killer can stop a random process. Swap acts as a last-resort safeguard and helps protect ECE service availability.

:::{admonition} Use swap only as an emergency safety net
A container runtime process, such as Docker or Podman, running on swap can cause allocator failures due to API timeouts. Do not rely on it to overcommit memory or reduce host RAM. Size allocator capacity so the OS does not need swap during normal operation. For allocator capacity planning, refer to [](./ece-manage-capacity.md).

> :::
> 
> As a baseline, provision at least 512 MB of swap. A common safeguard is 4 GB of swap for every 32 GB of RAM.
> Set `vm.swappiness` to `1` so the kernel uses swap only as a last resort. The OS preparation guides in [](./configure-operating-system.md) include this setting.
> How you create swap space depends on your operating system and infrastructure provider. Use your OS or cloud provider documentation to create a swap file or partition.

Reviewer: we lost a little spacing that makes this easier to scan

```suggestion
As a baseline, provision at least 512 MB of swap. A common safeguard is 4 GB of swap for every 32 GB of RAM.

Set `vm.swappiness` to `1` so the kernel uses swap only as a last resort. The OS preparation guides in [](./configure-operating-system.md) include this setting.

How you create swap space depends on your operating system and infrastructure provider. Use your OS or cloud provider documentation to create a swap file or partition.
```

### Allocator and other hosts

Enable swap on all ECE hosts except director hosts to improve system stability. If an allocator runs out of memory, the Linux out-of-memory (OOM) killer might terminate a random process on the host. Having swap space available provides a safeguard against sudden memory pressure and helps protect the availability of ECE services.

:::{important}
Swap should be treated as an emergency safety net only — not as a way to overcommit memory or reduce host RAM. If a container runtime process (Docker or Podman) runs on swap, it can cause allocator failures due to API timeouts (visible as errors in `allocator.log`). Always ensure allocators are not over-allocated so the OS does not routinely rely on swap.
:::

There is no specific recommendation for sizing swap, but 4 GB of swap per 32 GB of RAM has proven to be a reasonable safeguard for most ECE installations. As a baseline, ECE hosts should have at least 512 MB of swap space.

To ensure that swap remains a last-resort safeguard, set the `vm.swappiness` kernel setting to `1`, as described in the [Configure your OS](./configure-operating-system.md) preparation guides.

> The method for provisioning swap space depends on your operating system and infrastructure provider. Consult your OS or cloud provider's documentation for instructions on creating a swap file or partition.

Reviewer: I came here because of edu's comment, but I think this could be refined a little so it fits better on the page - more of a software prereq framing than a considerations framing

could also move it up beside "free ram" so all memory topics are together

```suggestion
## Swap [ece-swap-considerations]

Swap requirements depend on the ECE roles assigned to the host:

* **Director hosts:** Do not enable swap. Directors run ZooKeeper, and swap can severely degrade ZooKeeper performance. For background, refer to the [ZooKeeper administrator guide](https://zookeeper.apache.org/doc/current/zookeeperAdmin.html).
* **All other hosts, including allocators:** Enable swap. If the host runs out of memory, the Linux OOM killer can stop a random process. Swap acts as a last-resort safeguard and helps protect ECE service availability.

::::{important}
Use swap only as an emergency safety net. Do not rely on it to overcommit memory or reduce host RAM. Size allocator capacity so the OS does not need swap during normal operation. For allocator capacity planning, refer to [](./ece-manage-capacity.md).
::::

As a baseline, provision at least 512 MB of swap. A common safeguard is 4 GB of swap for every 32 GB of RAM.

Set `vm.swappiness` to `1` so the kernel uses swap only as a last resort. The OS preparation guides in [](./configure-operating-system.md) include this setting.

How you create swap space depends on your operating system and infrastructure provider. Use your OS or cloud provider documentation to create a swap file or partition.
```

Author: thanks @shainaraskas could we consider https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/7504#discussion_r3635034484 before we apply suggestion here please?

Author: > I came here because of edu's comment, but I think this could be refined a little so it fits better on the page - more of a software prereq framing than a considerations framing

As a reader, I see this update makes the `Use swap only as an emergency safety net.` note become the common awareness for both director hosts and other/allocator hosts, where it's actually not the thing we expected, as described below:
* For director hosts, we simply don't want to enable swap at all
* For other hosts/allocator hosts, we recommend enable swap, but only as safety net for stability reasons.

So this `::::{important}` note or per https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/7504#discussion_r3637100812, the "admonition" should be only under allocator section.

---

> could also move it up beside "free ram" so all memory topics are together

Yeah that's a good point. I will do that.

Author: Done in https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/7504/commits/de4a9302058ea0ab0f9273f0e39c4bc2b61900cc. I will mark this one as resolved.

Reviewer: fwiw I think that this shaping is ok. we're saying

* here's when to do it 
* and here's how to do it 

in order.

if we are worried about a reader misconstruing this, the fix is probably a subheading like `## Swap guidelines`. people can then intentionally move to the subsection once they determine swapping applies to them.

Author: Thanks @shainaraskas sorry for the back and forth, but I think @eedugon's point also makes sense and also Shaina your suggestion is much tidier and concise to read ^ ^ 
Let's me accept your suggestion and see how it goes. 

Thanks for your patience!

:::

For more information about FIPS compliance across the {{stack}}, refer to [](/deploy-manage/security/fips.md).

## Swap considerations [ece-swap-considerations]

> Unlike Elasticsearch nodes, which run with [swap disabled](/deploy-manage/deploy/self-managed/setup-configuration-memory.md), ECE hosts have different swap requirements depending on the host role.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unlike Elasticsearch nodes, which run with [swap disabled](/deploy-manage/deploy/self-managed/setup-configuration-memory.md), ECE hosts have different swap requirements based on their roles.
```

### Director hosts

::::{warning}
Do not enable swap on director hosts. ECE director hosts run ZooKeeper, and swapping seriously degrades ZooKeeper performance. Refer to the [ZooKeeper administrator guide](https://zookeeper.apache.org/doc/current/zookeeperAdmin.html) for details.

> ::::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Do not enable swap on director hosts. ECE director hosts run ZooKeeper, and swapping can significantly degrade ZooKeeper performance. Refer to the [ZooKeeper administrator guide](https://zookeeper.apache.org/doc/current/zookeeperAdmin.html) for details.
```

Remove the warning admonition if that's the only message of this section.

### Allocator and other hosts

> If an ECE allocator runs out of memory, the Linux out of memory (OOM) killer stops a random process on the runner. Having swap space available can prevent this from happening and protect the availability of ECE services.

Reviewer 2: Starting the sentence with the `If an allocator runs out of memory` feels odd. Originally the section started with `ECE hosts should have swap enabled for stability reasons`, and we need a similar sentence but oriented to this sub-section.

Consider this small change, in alignment with the previous section that starts with `Do not enable`:

```suggestion
Enable swap on all ECE hosts except director hosts to improve system stability. If an allocator runs out of memory, the Linux out-of-memory (OOM) killer might terminate a random process on the host. Having swap space available provides a safeguard against sudden memory pressure and helps protect the availability of ECE services.
```

:::{important}
Swap should be treated as an emergency safety net only — not as a way to overcommit memory or reduce host RAM. If a container runtime process (Docker or Podman) runs on swap, it can cause allocator failures due to API timeouts (visible as errors in `allocator.log`). Always ensure allocators are not over-allocated so the OS does not routinely rely on swap.

> :::

Reviewer 2: I think this note is important and should exist here, but I don't like how the sentences look, with multiple parenthesis, the dash, and the unexpected mention of a log file.

@shainaraskas : would you help on this and share a suggestion? =)

Reviewer: we can probably skip the log file mention. put a suggestion in my other comment, but

```suggestion
::::{important}
Use swap only as an emergency safety net. Do not rely on it to overcommit memory or reduce host RAM. Size allocator capacity so the OS does not need swap during normal operation. For allocator capacity planning, refer to [](./ece-manage-capacity.md).
::::
```

Author: @shainaraskas I have mixed feelings. 
Removing log file mention is fine, but removing the whole repercussion of running on swap seems to make the content a bit less clear to me as a reader.

WDYT we keep it and use `admonition` instead of `important`?

```suggestion
:::{admonition} Use swap only as an emergency safety net.
A container runtime process, such as Docker or Podman, running on swap can cause allocator failures due to API timeouts. Do not rely on it to overcommit memory or reduce host RAM. Size allocator capacity so the OS does not need swap during normal operation. For allocator capacity planning, refer to [](./ece-manage-capacity.md).
:::
```

As long as we can have the repercussion described, we should be fine.

Reviewer 3: I would vote the one written by @kunisen , it's good to stress on the repercussion

Reviewer 2: Looks good @kunisen , go ahead! Just remove the dot in the title of the admonition :)

Author: Thanks @madhava-sridhar and @eedugon, I will go with it then :)

```suggestion
:::{admonition} Use swap only as an emergency safety net
A container runtime process, such as Docker or Podman, running on swap can cause allocator failures due to API timeouts. Do not rely on it to overcommit memory or reduce host RAM. Size allocator capacity so the OS does not need swap during normal operation. For allocator capacity planning, refer to [](./ece-manage-capacity.md).
:::
```

There is no specific recommendation for sizing swap, but 4 GB of swap per 32 GB of RAM has proven to be a reasonable safeguard for most ECE installations. As a baseline, ECE hosts should have at least 512 MB of swap space.

> Set the `vm.swappiness` kernel setting to `1`, as described in the [Configure your OS](./configure-operating-system.md) preparation guides, so that swap is used only as a last resort.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To ensure that swap remains a last-resort safeguard, set the `vm.swappiness` kernel setting to `1`, as described in the [Configure your OS](./configure-operating-system.md) preparation guides.
```

That paragraph needed a smoother intro by just switching the order =)
